crates.io token scopes (#2947)
rust-lang/rfcs: text/0000-crates-io-token-scopes.md

# crates.io token scopes RFC

- Feature Name: `crates_io_token_scopes`
- Start Date: (fill me in with today's date, YYYY-MM-DD)
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/0000)
- crates.io issue: [rust-lang/crates.io#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/crates.io/issues/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

This RFC proposes implementing scopes for crates.io tokens, allowing users to
choose which endpoints the token is allowed to call and which crates it's
allowed to affect.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

While the current implementation of API tokens for crates.io works fine for
developers using the `cargo` CLI on their workstations, it's not acceptable for
CI scenarios, such as publishing crates automatically once a git tag is pushed.

The implementation of scoped tokens would allow users to restrict the actions a

> token can do, decreasing the blast radius in case of automation bugs or token

Reviewer: Minor nit: “Blast radius” evokes very specific imagery I would generalise it to something like “risk”.
```suggestion
token can do, decreasing the risk in case of automation bugs or token
```

More endpoint scopes might be added in the future without the need of a
dedicated RFC.

There will also be an option to opt out of endpoint scopes and retain the
permission model implemented before this RFC (called "legacy"), which allows
access to all (documented and undocumented) crates.io API endpoints except for
adding new tokens.

The crates.io UI will pre-select the scopes needed by the `cargo` CLI, which at
the time of writing this RFC are `publish-new`, `publish-update`, `yank` and
`change-owners`. The user will have to explicitly opt into extra scopes or the
legacy permission model.

Tokens created before the implementation of this RFC will use the legacy
permission model.

## Crates scope

The user will be able to opt into limiting which crates the token can act on by
defining a crates scope. It will be possible to set a crates scope even with
the legacy endpoint scope.

The crates scope can be left empty to allow the token to act on all the crates
owned by the user, or it can contain the comma-separated list of crate names
the token can interact with. Crate names can contain `*` to match one or more

> characters.

Reviewer 2: In all other contexts I know of (e.g. shell glob patterns, regular expressions), the asterisk means zero or more characters rather than one or more characters, so e.g. `serde*` would match anything starting with `serde`, including just `serde`. Making it one or more characters instead is likely to surprise many people.

Author: Good point, I changed the text of the RFC to reflect that.

registries.

## Endpoint scopes

The scopes proposed by this RFC allow access to the following endpoints:

| Endpoint | Required scope |
| --- | --- |
| `PUT /crates/new` (new crates) | **publish-new** |
| `PUT /crates/new` (existing crates) | **publish-update** |
| `DELETE /crates/:crate_id/:version/yank` | **yank** |
| `PUT /crates/:crate_id/:version/unyank` | **yank** |
| `PUT /crates/:crate_id/owners` | **change-owners** |
| `DELETE /crates/:crate_id/owners` | **change-owners** |

Removing an endpoint from a scope or adding an existing endpoint to an existing
scope will be considered a breaking change. Adding newly created endpoints to
an existing scope will be allowed only at the moment of their creation, if the
crates.io team believes the new endpoint won't grant more privileges than the
existing set of endpoints in that scope.

## Crates scope

The pattern for the crate scope is desugared into a regular expression,
following these rules:

* **`^`** is added at the start of the pattern, and **`$`** is added at the end of it.
* **`,`** is desugared into `|`, separating multiple patterns.
* **`*`** is desugared into `.+`, matching one or more characters greedily.

> * All other characters are quoted to prevent them from having a special meaning.

Reviewer 2: An alternative would be to allow only characters that are allowed in crate names in addition to `,` and `*`. Since none of the characters in crate names have a special meaning in regular expressions, and `,` and `*` are not allowed in crate names, this would remove any ambiguities.

Author: True. I'm not sure changing this matters that much though.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, this is more of an implementation commment – what I suggested is easier to translate into code, but it doesn't really matter.

```
foo,foo-*
```

... is desugared into the following regex:

```
^foo|foo\-.+$
```

Any combination of those characters is allowed, but crates.io might define a
complexity limit for the generated regular expressions.

Every time an endpoint acting on a crate is called the regex is desugared,

> compiled and used to match the crate name. If no match is found the request is

Reviewer 3: This feels too prescriptive, e.g. caching the compiled regex would not be allowed if following the letter of this paragraph. Is that intended? If so, perhaps adding the reasons for it here would help clarity.

Author: No, that was not the intent of the paragraph. The point I wanted to make with it was that the regex is evaluated each time a request is made, not when the token is created: because of that, the token will also be able to act on crates published after the token is created, if they match the pattern.

I'll update the text.

Author: Updated!

  to, either by checking boxes or defining a single glob pattern.
  [(documentation)][nuget-docs]
* [npm] (package registry for JavaScript) implements a binary
  "read-only"/"read-write" permission model, also allowing to restrict the IP
  ranges allowed to access the token, but does not allow restricting the
  packages a token is allowed to change. [(documentation)][npm-docs]
* [pypi] (package registry for Python) only implements the "upload packages"
  permission, and allows to scope each token to a *single* package.
  [(documentation)][pypi-docs]
* [rubygems] (package registry for Ruby) and [packagist] (package registry for
  PHP) don't implement any kind of scoping for the API tokens.

[nuget]: https://www.nuget.org/
[nuget-docs]: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/nuget/nuget-org/scoped-api-keys
[npm]: https://www.npmjs.com
[npm-docs]: https://docs.npmjs.com/creating-and-viewing-authentication-tokens
[pypi]: https://pypi.org
[pypi-docs]: https://pypi.org/help/#apitoken
[rubygems]: https://rubygems.org/
[packagist]: https://packagist.org/

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

> * Should there be separate scopes for publishing a new crate and a version of

Reviewer 4: Either this or giving the tokens an expiration time might be nice to have from start.

* Are there more scopes that would be useful to implement from the start?

> * Should crate scopes be allowed on tokens with the legacy endpoint scope?

Reviewer 2: In my opinion, legacy scopes should disappear if possible. I know it's not possible, but let's not add new features to them.

Author: Hmm, I don't think it's good to artificially restrict features, but I personally don't care much about it either way.

* Is the current behavior of crate scopes on endpoints that don't interact with
  crates the best, or should a token with crate scopes prevent access to
  endpoints that don't act on crates?

> # Future possibilities

Reviewer 2: We could mention kornelski's proposal to allow requiring approval for actions performed with a token in this section.

Author: Mentioned @kornelski's proposal as a future possibility!

endpoints the token is authorized to call, and the crates the token is allowed
to act on.

## Endpoint scopes

The user will be able to choose one or more endpoint scopes. This RFC proposes
adding the following endpoint scopes:

* **publish-new**: allows publishing new crates
* **publish-update**: allows publishing a new version for existing crates the
  user owns
* **yank**: allows yanking and unyanking existing versions of the user's crates
* **change-owners**: allows inviting new owners or removing existing owners

More endpoint scopes might be added in the future without the need of a
dedicated RFC.

There will also be an option to opt out of endpoint scopes and retain the
permission model implemented before this RFC (called "legacy"), which allows
access to all (documented and undocumented) crates.io API endpoints except for
adding new tokens.

The crates.io UI will pre-select the scopes needed by the `cargo` CLI, which at
the time of writing this RFC are `publish-new`, `publish-update`, `yank` and
`change-owners`. The user will have to explicitly opt into extra scopes or the
legacy permission model.

Tokens created before the implementation of this RFC will use the legacy

> permission model.

Reviewer 5: During the deployment, if the `legacy` scope remains, then I think we should migrate existing tokens to only include the default scopes required by cargo. If there are any token-based users of legacy endpoints, then I think they should have to explicitly opt-in.

Author: Hmm, this would break everyone using the token to authenticate to endpoints not used by Cargo. Even though we're not providing stability guarantees for them I'd be wary of blindly breaking them. At least I'd like some stats on which endpoints are accessed with the cookie and which are used with tokens.

## Crates scope

The user will be able to opt into limiting which crates the token can act on by
defining a crates scope. It will be possible to set a crates scope even with
the legacy endpoint scope.

The crates scope can be left empty to allow the token to act on all the crates
owned by the user, or it can contain the comma-separated list of crate names
the token can interact with. Crate names can contain `*` to match zero or more
characters.

For example, a crates scope of `lazy_static,serde*` allows the token to act on
the `lazy_static` crate or any present or future crates starting with `serde`
(including `serde` itself), if the user is an owner of those crates.

The crates scope will allow access to all present and future crates matching
it. When an endpoint that doesn't interact with crates is called by a token
with a crates scope, the crates scope will be ignored and the call will be
authorized.

Tokens created before the implementation of this RFC won't have a crates scope,
and it will be possible to use a crates scope in a token with the legacy

> endpoint scope.

Author: The first sentence is spot on! I'm not so sure if I want to commit to having a "edit token" functionality in the RFC though.

| `PUT /crates/new` (existing crates) | **publish-update** |
| `DELETE /crates/:crate_id/:version/yank` | **yank** |
| `PUT /crates/:crate_id/:version/unyank` | **yank** |
| `PUT /crates/:crate_id/owners` | **change-owners** |
| `DELETE /crates/:crate_id/owners` | **change-owners** |

Removing an endpoint from a scope or adding an existing endpoint to an existing
scope will be considered a breaking change. Adding newly created endpoints to
an existing scope will be allowed only at the moment of their creation, if the
crates.io team believes the new endpoint won't grant more privileges than the
existing set of endpoints in that scope.

## Crates scope

The pattern for the crate scope is desugared into a regular expression,
following these rules:

* **`^`** is added at the start of the pattern, and **`$`** is added at the end of it.
* **`,`** is desugared into `|`, separating multiple patterns.
* **`*`** is desugared into `.*`, matching zero or more characters greedily.
* All other characters are quoted to prevent them from having a special meaning.

As an example, the following pattern:

```
foo,bar-*
```

... is desugared into the following regex:

```

> ^foo|bar\-.*$

Reviewer 6: Doesn't this match anything that starts with "foo" or contains "bar-"?  That is, aren't parentheses needed around the alternation so the anchors apply to the whole expression rather than only to one branch each?

to act on.

## Endpoint scopes

The user will be able to choose one or more endpoint scopes. This RFC proposes
adding the following endpoint scopes:

* **publish-new**: allows publishing new crates
* **publish-update**: allows publishing a new version for existing crates the
  user owns
* **yank**: allows yanking and unyanking existing versions of the user's crates
* **change-owners**: allows inviting new owners or removing existing owners
* **legacy**: allows accessing all the endpoints on crates.io except for
  creating new tokens, like tokens created befores the implementation of this
  RFC.

More endpoint scopes might be added in the future without the need of a
dedicated RFC.

The crates.io UI will pre-select the scopes needed by the `cargo` CLI, which at
the time of writing this RFC are `publish-new`, `publish-update`, `yank` and
`change-owners`. The user will have to explicitly opt into extra scopes or the
legacy permission model.

Tokens created before the implementation of this RFC will default to the legacy
scope.

## Crates scope

The user will be able to opt into limiting which crates the token can act on by
defining a crates scope.

> The crates scope can be left empty to allow the token to act on all the crates

Reviewer 7: If we support `*` then shouldn't existing tokens default to the wildcard instead of an empty string?

Reviewer 8: It's probably worth differentiating between a legacy token and a new `*` token, if only because then it'll be *possible* to revoke all legacy tokens while ignoring newly generated personal wildcard tokens.

Reviewer 7: we can still do the same thing by looking at the timestamp of when the token was created :)

> owned by the user, or it can contain the comma-separated list of crate names

Reviewer 7: It feels to me like the comma separated list should be considered an implementation detail. On the API layer I would prefer to make this an actual array of patterns instead, and on the frontend I think I would prefer to have it as a list too.
